---
title: Advanced Medical Technology at South by Southwest
date: 2016-03-29 08:18:00 Z
published: false
---

### Bioelectronics
In the MedTech track a panel called Innserspace: Bioelectronics and Medicine’s Future moderated by Sree Sreenivisan,  the panelists discussed bioelectronics and the technology behind small implantable devices that could help deliver targeted treatment to sick and chronically ill patients. Bioelectronics represent an advancement over traditional drugs, which are actually quite primitive in their design and delivery. Today’s drugs distribute all over the body and sometimes causing debilitating side effects. This is a particularly important problem for patients who take drugs every day for glucose deficiencies, blood pressure problems, etc. Bioelectronics could offer a leap forward in treatment for these patients by using the systems of electric current present in our nervous system

By interacting directly with the tissue or organ in need of treatment, bioelectronics could bring the targeted treatment that many need. The technology uses electrical signals to repair a tissue or organ by interacting with it in a way similar to the way our brain communicates with various parts of our body. One of the ways they could work is by learning when the brain is sending the wrong signals to an organ, then reengineering the signal and pulsing it to an organ to correct its function. A company called Cala Health is working on commercializing products that do this. 

One of the panelists, Dr Moncef Slaoui spent 27 years developing the first malaria vaccine and is now getting into bioelectronic medicine. He traveled the world trying to determine: 1) if the technology exists and 2) if it is ready to help create bioelectronic medicine. He found that it did but was all happening independently: miniaturization, wireless, and computing were being developed but they all were functioning independently and not working together in health. To galvanize collaboration in the field he created an innovation challenge focussed on getting these technologists in the same room. 

Well-spoken genius, and assistant professor in this field Walter Voit, displayed a small thin rigid piece of plastic that contained an embedded circuit. He then warmed it up in his hand and the rigid plastic reacted, and molded to the shape of his hand. These materials (shape memory polymers) can attach to an organ and deliver electric pulses in a way that will fit comfortably within the body.
These devices also represent a data goldmine as they can essentially act as sensors. An example comes from St. Jude Hospital where they are using data from heart failure sensors to learn 

Some issues still holding the industry back are heat generated by the devices and also the body’s natural reaction to reject devices. The advanced polymers should help as well as the body’s ability to generate power for the devices.

### Neurostimulation
Cutting edge neuroscience tells us that advances in brain mapping and neurostimulation offer tremendous potential to optimize our brainpower. A panel discussion called Pimp My Brain: A Crash Course in DIY Brainhacking was led by Cameron Craddock, Director at the Nathan S Kline Institute For Psychiatric Research and Daniel Margulies, Group Leader at the Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences

Several methods exist for neurostimulation. Non-invasive localized stimulation can elicit strong responses by targeting very specific parts of the brain, and can affect nearly any cognitive function. Free and open sourced brain mapping software makes this easier to do. What is better for home treatment and self administration are the general brain stimulation techniques. 

Research provides evidence that stimulation has an effect on mental performance but little is understood on how it works. Correlative data is strong as several studies showed increased ability to perform mathematical functions and improved motor skills. The panelists argument is that it is ok to have an effective treatment that is not well understood. There were some interesting side effects too. When researchers stimulated the reward center of the brain they found increased resistance to depression, but patients were then more likely to partake in risky behavior!

There are already companies working in this field that is not well understood, like Thync which creates an external neurostimulator to stimulate focus and calming sensations by indirectly stimulating the nervous system through nerves in the face and head.

Open source brain mapping software is making it easier and more accessible for everyone to understand which parts of the brain are stimulated by direct stimulation. 
 
Biofeedback is another sub-field within neurostimulation. Currently there is plenty of advice available for meditation and other methods centering yourself in the right mental state before engaging in a particular activity. However there is no data driven method to measure the quality of your mental state or the effectiveness of your meditation. Biofeedback devices offer tools and techniques to accomplish this. 
There are even optical sensors on the brain. A company in Norway produces devices that shine blue light into your ears to fight depression